<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix: Stavrogin’s Confession</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="appendix" epub:type="appendix">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Appendix: Stavrogin’s Confession</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">Three Hitherto Unpublished Chapters of the Novel <i>The Possessed</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="appendix-part-1" epub:type="part">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="title">PART SECOND<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></p>
				</header>
				<section id="appendix-chapter-1-1" epub:type="chapter">
					<hgroup>
						<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
						<p epub:type="title">At Tikhon’s</p>
					</hgroup>
					<section id="appendix-subchapter-1-1-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
						<p><span class="sc">Nikolai Vsevolodovich</span> did not sleep that night, and all the time he sat on the sofa, often gazing fixedly at a particular point in the corner near the chest of drawers. All night long the lamp burnt in his room. About seven o’clock in the morning he fell asleep where he sat, and, when Alexei Egorovich, according to invariable custom, came into his room at half-past nine precisely with a cup of coffee and, by coming in, woke him, he seemed unpleasantly surprised that he should have slept so long and that it was already so late. He hastily drank his coffee, hastily dressed himself, and hurriedly left the house. To Alexei Egorovich’s hesitating question “Any orders?” he made no reply. He walked along the street looking at the ground, deep in thought, save that now and then he looked up for a moment, raised his head, showing a certain vague but violent uneasiness. At one crossing, not far from the house, a crowd of peasants, about fifty or more, crossed the road; they walked orderly, almost silently, in deliberate order. At the little shop, where he had to wait a moment, some one said that these were “Shpigulin’s workmen.” He hardly paid any attention to them. At last, about half-past ten, he approached the gate of Our Lady Spasso-Efimev Monastery, on the outskirts of the town, by the river. Here only he suddenly seemed to remember something alarming and troublesome, stopped, hastily fumbled for something in his side pocket and⁠—smiled. Upon entering the enclosure he asked the first youth he met how to find Bishop Tikhon, who was living in retirement in the Monastery. The youth began bowing, and immediately showed the way. Near the little flight of steps, at the end of the long two-storied Monastery buildings, he was taken over from the youth, authoritatively and promptly, by a fat grey-haired monk, who took him through a long narrow corridor, also bowing all the time (though because of his fat he could not bow low, but only twitched his head frequently and abruptly), and all the time begging him to follow, though Nikolai Vsevolodovich followed without being told to. The monk asked questions incessantly and spoke of the Father Archimandrite, but, receiving no answers, he became more and more deferential. Stavrogin observed that he was known here, although, so far as he remembered, he had only been here as a child. When they reached the door at the very end of the corridor the monk opened it, as if he had authority, and enquired familiarly of the lay-brother, who instantly appeared, whether they might go in; then, without waiting for a reply, he threw the door wide open, and, bending down, let the “dear” visitor enter. On receiving a gratuity he quickly disappeared, as if in flight. Nikolai Vsevolodovich entered a small room, and almost at that very moment there appeared in the door of the adjoining room a tall thin man, aged about fifty-five, in a simple cassock, looking rather ill, with a vague smile and with a strange, somewhat shy expression. This was that very Tikhon of whom Nikolai Vsevolodovich had heard for the first time from Shatov, and about whom he had since managed to collect in passing certain information.</p>
						<p>The information was varied and contradictory, but there was something common to it all, namely, that those who liked Tikhon and those who did not like him (there were such) both kept back something of their opinion. Those who did not like him probably did it out of contempt for him; and his adherents, even the ardent ones, from a sort of modesty, as though wishing to conceal something about him⁠—some weakness, some craziness perhaps. Nikolai Vsevolodovich had found out that Tikhon had been living in the Monastery for about six years, and that the humblest people as well as the most distinguished were in the habit of going to him there; that even in far-distant Petersburg he had ardent admirers amongst men, but chiefly among women. Again he had also heard from one stately-looking old man belonging to our “Club,” a pious old man too, this opinion, that “that Tikhon is almost a madman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> and, undoubtedly, given to drink.” For my own part, I shall add, although this is anticipating, that the last statement is complete rubbish, but that he is afflicted with a chronic rheumatic affection in his legs and suffers at times from nervous tremors. Nikolai Vsevolodovich also learnt that the Bishop who lived in retreat in the Monastery had not managed to inspire a particular respect for himself in the Monastery itself, either through weakness of character or through absentmindedness unforgivable and improper in one of his rank. It was also said that the Father Archimandrite, a stern man, conscientious in the discharge of his duties as Father Superior, and famous too for his scholarship, even cherished a certain hostility against him and condemned him (not to his face, but indirectly) for his slovenly mode of life, and almost accused him of heresy. The monks, too, treated the sick Bishop not exactly with neglect, but with a sort of familiarity. The two rooms which composed Tikhon’s cell were also rather strangely furnished. Side by side with clumsy old pieces of furniture, covered with shabby leather, were three or four elegant things: a superb easy-chair, a large writing-table of excellent workmanship, a daintily carved bookcase, little tables, shelves, all of which had, of course, been given to him as presents. There was an expensive Bokhara carpet, and also mats. There were engravings of a “worldly” nature and of mythological subjects, and alongside with these in the corner there was a large shrine glittering with gold and silver icons, one of which was of very ancient date and contained relics. His library also, it was said, was of a too varied and contradictory character: side by side with the works of the great ecclesiastics and Christian Fathers there were works “of drama and fiction, and perhaps something even worse.”</p>
						<p>After the first greetings, uttered with an evident awkwardness on both sides, hurriedly and even indistinctly, Tikhon led his visitor to his study, and, as if all the while in a hurry, made him sit on the sofa, in front of the table, and sat down himself nearby in a wicker chair.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> To his surprise Nikolai Vsevolodovich was completely at a loss. It looked as if he was making up his mind with all his might on a step extraordinary and inevitable, and yet at the same time almost impossible for him. For a minute he looked about the study, evidently without seeing what he looked at;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> he was thinking but, perhaps, without knowing of what. He was roused by the stillness, and suddenly it appeared to him that Tikhon cast down his eyes with a kind of shyness, with a quite unnecessary<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a> smile. This instantly roused in him disgust and reaction; he wanted to get up and go; in his opinion, Tikhon was decidedly drunk. But the latter suddenly raised his eyes and looked at him with such a firm and thoughtful gaze, and at the same time with such an unexpected and enigmatical expression, that he nearly shuddered. And now it suddenly seemed to him something absolutely different: that Tikhon already knew why he had come, that he was already warned (although nobody in the whole world could know the reason), and that if he did not speak first, it was because he was sparing his feelings, was afraid of his humiliation.</p>
						<p>“Do you know me?” he suddenly asked abruptly. “Did I introduce myself when I came in or not? Pardon me, I am so absent-minded.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
						<p>“You did not introduce yourself, but I had the pleasure of seeing you once about four years ago, here in the Monastery⁠ ⁠… by chance.”</p>
						<p>Tikhon spoke unhurriedly and evenly, in a soft voice, pronouncing his words clearly and distinctly.</p>
						<p>“I was not in this Monastery four years ago,” Nikolai Vsevolodovich replied with unnecessary rudeness. “I was here only as a child, when you were not yet here.”</p>
						<p>“Perhaps you have forgotten?” Tikhon observed guardedly and without insisting upon it.</p>
						<p>“No, I have not forgotten; it would be ridiculous if I did not remember,” Stavrogin on his part insisted rather too hotly. “Perhaps you have merely heard about me and formed some idea, and thus made the mistake that you had seen me.”</p>
						<p>Tikhon remained silent. Nikolai Vsevolodovich now noticed that a nervous shudder sometimes passed over his face, a symptom of chronic nervous exhaustion.</p>
						<p>“I see only that you are not well to-day,” he said. “I think it would be better if I went.”</p>
						<p>He even began to rise from his seat.</p>
						<p>“Yes, to-day and yesterday I have had violent pains in my legs and I slept little during the night.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
						<p>Tikhon stopped. His visitor suddenly fell into a vague reverie. The silence lasted long, about two minutes.</p>
						<p>“You were watching me?” he suddenly asked with anxiety and suspicion.</p>
						<p>“I looked at you, and was reminded of the expression on your mother’s face. Externally unlike, there is much inner, spiritual resemblance.”</p>
						<p>“There is no resemblance at all, certainly no spiritual⁠—absolutely none!” Nikolai Vsevolodovich grew again uneasy for no reason and too persistent without knowing why. “You say this just⁠ ⁠… out of pity for my state,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-7" id="noteref-7" epub:type="noteref">7</a> he said without thinking. “Ah! does my mother come and see you?”</p>
						<p>“She does.”</p>
						<p>“I didn’t know. She never told me. Does she come often?”</p>
						<p>“Nearly every month, sometimes oftener.”</p>
						<p>“I never, never heard of that. I did not know.” He seemed terribly alarmed by that fact. “And she, of course, told you that I am mad,” he broke out again.</p>
						<p>“No, not exactly that you are mad⁠—though, I’ve heard that notion too, but from others.”</p>
						<p>“You must have a very good memory, if you can remember such trifles. And did you hear about the slap in the face?”</p>
						<p>“I heard something about that.”</p>
						<p>“You mean everything. You must have a great deal of time on your hands. And about the duel too?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-8" id="noteref-8" epub:type="noteref">8</a></p>
						<p>“And about the duel.”</p>
						<p>“You don’t need newspapers here. Shatov warned you against me?”</p>
						<p>“No, I know Mr. Shatov, though; but I haven’t seen him for a long time.”</p>
						<p>“Hm.⁠ ⁠… What’s that map you have got there? Ah, the map of the last war! What do you want with it?”</p>
						<p>“I wanted to refer to it in reading this book. It’s a most interesting description.”</p>
						<p>“Let me see. Yes, the account is not bad.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> Yet what strange reading for you.”</p>
						<p>He drew the book towards him and gave it a cursory glance. It was a full and able account of the circumstances of the last war, not so much from the military point of view, however, as from the purely literary. Having turned the book over, he suddenly put it down impatiently.</p>
						<p>“I positively do not know why I came here,” he said with aversion, looking straight into Tikhon’s eyes, as though he expected him to reply.</p>
						<p>“You, too, are not feeling well!”</p>
						<p>“No, not altogether.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></p>
						<p>And suddenly he related, in the shortest and most abrupt manner so that certain words could hardly be understood, that he was subject, especially at nights, to a kind of hallucinations, that he sometimes saw or felt near him a spiteful being, mocking and “rational,” “in various forms and in various characters, but it is always one and the same and I always fly into a rage.”</p>
						<p>Wild and confused were these revelations, as if indeed they came from a madman. And yet Nikolai Vsevolodovich spoke with such strange frankness, never seen in him before, with such a simplicity, quite unnatural to him, that it seemed as if suddenly and unexpectedly his former self had completely disappeared. He was not in the least ashamed of showing the fear with which he spoke of his apparition. But all this was momentary and went as suddenly as it had come.</p>
						<p>“It’s all nonsense,” he said, drawing back with awkward irritation. “I’ll go and see a doctor.”</p>
						<p>“You should, certainly,” Tikhon assented.</p>
						<p>“You speak so confidently.⁠ ⁠… Have you seen people, like me, with such apparitions?”</p>
						<p>“I have, but very rarely. Indeed I remember only one such case in my life. He was a military officer; it was after he had lost his wife, his life companion. The other case was mere hearsay. Both men then went to a cure abroad.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a> Have you been subject to this for long?”</p>
						<p>“For about a year, but it’s all nonsense. I’ll see a doctor. This is all nonsense, utter nonsense. It is myself in various aspects, and nothing else. But even as I use that phrase, you certainly think that I am still doubtful and am not sure that it is myself, and not really the devil.”</p>
						<p>Tikhon gave him a questioning look.</p>
						<p>“And⁠ ⁠… you actually see him?” he asked, dismissing, in fact, any question of its being a false and morbid hallucination. “Do you actually see a certain image?”</p>
						<p>“It is strange that you should lay such stress upon this, when I have already told you that I do see it.” Stavrogin again began to grow more and more irritated with each word. “Of course I see it; I see it as plainly as I see you⁠ ⁠… and sometimes I see it and I’m not sure that I see it, although I do see it⁠ ⁠… and sometimes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a> I do not know what is real: I or it⁠ ⁠… it’s all nonsense. And can’t you possibly believe that this is indeed the devil?” he added, breaking into a laugh and passing too abruptly into derision. “Surely that would be more in keeping with your profession.”</p>
						<p>“It is more likely a disease, although.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
						<p>“Although what?”</p>
						<p>“Devils certainly exist, but one’s conception of them may be very various.”</p>
						<p>“And you have again just looked down,” Stavrogin broke in with an irritating laugh, “because you were ashamed that I should believe in the devil; but I made out that I did not believe and cunningly put the question to you: does he or does he not really exist?”</p>
						<p>Tikhon gave a vague smile.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a></p>
						<p>“Well, know then that I am not at all ashamed, and to make up for my rudeness I will tell you, seriously and unblushingly: I do believe in the devil, I believe canonically, in a personal, not allegorical, devil, and I do not in the least want to extort an answer from any one; now that’s all.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a></p>
						<p>He gave a nervous, unnatural laugh. Tikhon looked at him with curiosity, with a rather timorous, yet gentle look.</p>
						<p>“You believe in God?” Nikolai Vsevolodovich suddenly burst out.</p>
						<p>“I do.”</p>
						<p>“It is said, if you believe and bid a mountain move, it will move⁠ ⁠… though, pardon me this nonsense. Yet I am curious to know: could you move a mountain or not?”</p>
						<p>“If God will, I could,” Tikhon uttered quickly and calmly, again beginning to look down at the ground.</p>
						<p>“Well, it’s just the same as saying that God Himself could move it. But you, you, as a reward for your belief in God?”</p>
						<p>“Perhaps I could move it.”</p>
						<p>“ ‘Perhaps.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a> Well, that is not bad, either. But you are still doubtful?”</p>
						<p>“Through the imperfection of my belief I have doubts.”</p>
						<p>“Why, do <i>you</i> believe incompletely?”</p>
						<p>“Yes⁠ ⁠… perhaps; I do believe and not perfectly,” Tikhon replied.</p>
						<p>“That is what I should not think, looking at you!”⁠—he suddenly gave him a look of some surprise, a perfectly simple look which did not at all harmonize with the mocking tone of the preceding questions.</p>
						<p>“Well, at any rate you do believe that, even if it be with God’s help, you could move it, and that is something, after all. At least, you wish to believe. And you take the mountain literally. It is a good principle. I observed that the progressives among our Levites are greatly inclined towards Lutheranism. Anyhow it is better than the <i>très peu</i> of the Archbishop, it is true, under the threat of the sword. You are, certainly, a Christian too.” Stavrogin spoke quickly, his words now serious, now mocking.</p>
						<p>“May I not be ashamed, Lord, of Thy Cross.” Tikhon almost whispered it, with a passionate whisper, and bowed his head still lower.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a></p>
						<p>“And can one believe in the devil, without believing in God?” Stavrogin laughed.</p>
						<p>“Oh, there are such people everywhere.” Tikhon raised his eyes and smiled.</p>
						<p>“And I am sure that you find such belief more respectable after all than complete unbelief.⁠ ⁠…”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> Stavrogin began to laugh.</p>
						<p>“On the contrary, complete atheism is more respectable than worldly indifference,” Tikhon answered, with visible gaiety and good-nature.</p>
						<p>“Oho, that’s how you get round it!”</p>
						<p>“A complete atheist stands on the last rung but one before absolute faith (he may or may not step higher), but an indifferent man has no longer any faith at all, nothing but an ugly fear, and that only on rare occasions, if he is a sentimental man.”</p>
						<p>“Hm⁠ ⁠… you have read the Apocalypse?”</p>
						<p>“I have.”</p>
						<p>“Do you remember, ‘Write to the Angel of the Laodicean Church’?”</p>
						<p>“I do.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a></p>
						<p>“Where is the book?” Stavrogin began with a strange hurry and anxiety, searching with his eyes for the book on the table. “I want to read to you⁠ ⁠… you have a Russian translation?”</p>
						<p>“I know the passage, I remember it,” Tikhon murmured.</p>
						<p>“Do you know it by heart? Read it.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
						<p>He at once looked at the ground, rested both his hands on his knees, and impatiently prepared to listen. Tikhon repeated word for word:</p>
						<p>“Write to the Angel of the Laodicean Church: The true and authoritative witness of the beginning of the creations of God says Amen. I know thy works; thou art neither cold nor hot. Would that thou wert cold or hot. But in so far as thou art lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I shall spew thee out from my lips. For thou sayest: I am rich; I have everything and need nothing; but thou knowest not that thou art miserable, and poor and beggarly and blind and naked.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
						<p>“Enough,” Stavrogin cut him short.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a> “Do you know, I love you very much.”</p>
						<p>“I love you too,” Tikhon replied in a low voice.</p>
						<p>Stavrogin fell silent and suddenly lapsed again into his old reverie. This came as though in fits and now for the third time. And the “I love” he said to Tikhon was also said almost in an impulse, at any rate unexpectedly to himself. More than a minute passed.</p>
						<p>“Do not be angry,” Tikhon whispered, touching his arm very lightly with his finger and as though his courage failed him.</p>
						<p>Stavrogin shuddered and frowned angrily.</p>
						<p>“How did you know that I was angry?” he said hastily. Tikhon was about to reply, when he suddenly interrupted him in inexplicable alarm:</p>
						<p>“Why did you think that I must necessarily become angry? Yes, I was angry; you are right; and just because I had said to you ‘I love.’ You are right, but you are a crude cynic, you think slightingly of human nature. There might have been no anger, had it been any one else but myself.⁠ ⁠… Though, it does not matter about others; it concerns me. After all, you are a queer fellow and crazy.”</p>
						<p>He grew more and more irritated, and, strangely, made no attempt to restrain his language:</p>
						<p>“Listen, I do not like spies and thought-readers, at any rate those who creep into my soul. I do not invite any one into my soul; I need no one; I am able to shift for myself. You think I am afraid of you,” he raised his voice and looked up defiantly; “you are quite convinced that I have come to confide to you some ‘terrible’ secret, and you are waiting for it with all the hermit curiosity of which you are capable. Understand then that I will confide nothing to you, no secret, because I can perfectly well do without you.⁠ ⁠…”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a></p>
						<p>Tikhon looked at him firmly.</p>
						<p>“It surprised you that the Lamb prefers a cold man to a merely lukewarm one,” he said. “You don’t want to be merely lukewarm. I have a foreboding that you are possessed by an extraordinary intention, perhaps a terrible one. I implore you, don’t torment yourself and tell me everything.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a></p>
						<p>“And you knew for certain that I had come with something.”</p>
						<p>“I⁠ ⁠… guessed it,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a> Tikhon replied in a whisper, looking down.</p>
						<p>Nikolai Vsevolodovich was rather pale; his hands shook a little. For a few seconds he looked motionlessly and silently, as though coming to a final decision. At last he took out of the side pocket of his coat a few printed sheets and put them on the table.</p>
						<p>“These sheets are meant for circulation,” he said in a tremulous voice. “If only one man reads them, then understand that I shall keep them back no longer, and they will be read by every one. That is settled. I don’t need you at all, for I have settled it. But read them⁠ ⁠… while you are reading them, say nothing; but after you have read them⁠—say everything.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
						<p>“Shall I read them?” Tikhon asked irresolutely.</p>
						<p>“Do; I am calm.”</p>
						<p>“No; I shall not be able to read them without glasses; the printing is pale, foreign.”</p>
						<p>“Here are your glasses.” Stavrogin took them from the table and handed them to him, and leant on the back of the sofa. Tikhon did not look at him, and plunged straight into the reading.</p>
					</section>
					<section id="appendix-subchapter-1-1-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
						<p class="c013">The printing was in fact foreign: three little sheets of ordinary small-sized writing-paper printed and stitched together. It must have been printed secretly at a Russian press abroad, and the sheets at the first glance looked very much like a political pamphlet. The title read: “From Stavrogin.”</p>
						<p>I insert the document literally in my chronicle.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a> I have allowed myself to correct the spelling, for the mistakes are rather numerous and have surprised me a little, considering after all that the author was a man of education and even well-read (of course, relatively speaking). But in the style I have made no alterations whatever, in spite of its irregularities. It is at any rate clear that the writer was above all not a man of letters.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a></p>
						<p>“From Stavrogin.</p>
						<p>“I, Nikolai Stavrogin, retired officer, lived in the year 186.. in Petersburg, abandoned to vice, in which I found no pleasure. For a certain period at that time I rented three lodgings. In one of them I lived myself and boarded and lodged, and there at that time lived Marya Lebiadkin, now my lawful wife. My other two lodgings I rented by the month for the purpose of an intrigue: in one I received a certain lady who loved me, and in the other her maid, and for a time I was much engrossed with the notion of contriving that both the lady and the maid should meet each other at my lodging.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a> Knowing the characters of both, I anticipated for myself great pleasure from that joke.</p>
						<p>“While I was gradually preparing for this meeting, I had to go more often to one of the two lodgings in a large house in Gorokhovaya Street, since that was the place where the maid and I met. I had only one room there, on the fifth floor, which I rented from some Russian working-class people. They themselves fitted themselves into the adjoining room, which was smaller than mine and so much so that the door dividing my room from theirs always stood open, which was what I wanted. The husband, a clerk in some office, used to be out from early morning till night. His wife, a woman of about forty, was occupied in cutting down old clothes and making them up into new, and she also frequently left the house to deliver her work. I remained alone with their daughter,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> who was quite a child to look at. They called her Matryosha. Her mother loved her, but often beat her, and, as is the custom of these people, shouted at her horribly. This little girl waited on me and tidied up after me behind the screens. I declare I have forgotten the number of the house. Now, upon enquiry, I find that the old house has been demolished, and, where there were then two or three houses, there is now one very large new house. I have also forgotten my landlord’s name (or perhaps I never knew it even at the time). I remember that the woman was called Stepanida, I believe, Mikhailovna. Him I do not remember.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a> I suppose that if a search were started and all possible enquiries made by the Petersburg police, they could be traced. The flat was in a courtyard, in the corner. All happened in June. The house was painted a bright sky-blue.</p>
						<p>“One day I missed from my table a penknife which I did not need in the least, and which lay there for no particular reason. I told my landlady, without thinking that she would thrash her daughter for it. But the landlady had just been scolding the little girl<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> for the loss of some rag, suspecting that she had stolen it, and had even pulled her hair. When that rag was found under the tablecloth, the little girl did not utter a single word of complaint, and just looked in silence. I noticed that, and then for the first time I observed the face of the little girl, which until then I had hardly noticed properly. She had fair hair, and a freckled ordinary face, but there was much in it that was childish and quiet, extraordinarily quiet. The mother did not like it that the daughter made no complaint for having been beaten for nothing, and she raised her fist, but did not strike; and just at that moment the subject of the penknife came up. Besides the three of us, there was in fact nobody, and only the little girl went behind my screen. The woman flew into a rage at having for the first time punished her unjustly, and she rushed for the broom, tore twigs from it, and thrashed the little girl in my presence until her body was covered with scars, although the child was already in her twelfth year. Matryosha did not cry at the thrashing, probably because I was there, but she gave a strange sob at each blow. And afterwards she sobbed very much for a whole hour.</p>
						<p>“But there was just this before that happened: at the very moment when the landlady rushed for the broom to pull out twigs, I found the penknife on my bed, where it had somehow or other fallen from the table. Instantly it occurred to my mind not to say so, in order that she should be thrashed. I decided on it instantaneously; in such moments my breathing always stops. But I mean to tell the whole thing in the plainest language, so that there can no longer remain anything concealed.</p>
						<p>“Every unusually disgraceful, utterly degrading, dastardly, and, above all, ridiculous situation, in which I ever happened to be in my life, always roused in me, side by side with extreme anger, an incredible delight. I felt exactly this in moments of committing crimes and in moments when life was in danger. If I stole, I would feel, while committing the theft, a rapture from the consciousness of the depth of my vileness. It was not the vileness that I loved (here my mind was perfectly sound), but I enjoyed rapture from the tormenting consciousness of the baseness. In the same way each time when, standing at the barrier, I waited for my opponent to fire, I experienced just the same disgraceful and wild sensation; and once I did so with extraordinary vividness. I confess that I often myself looked out for it, because it is to me the strongest of sensations of the kind. When I received a slap in the face (and I received two in my life), it was there too, in spite of my terrible anger. But if the anger is checked by it, then the delight surpasses anything that can be imagined. I never spoke of this to any one, even by a hint, and I concealed it as a shame and disgrace. But when I was once soundly beaten in a public-house in Petersburg and was dragged by the hair, I did not experience that sensation, but only an incredible anger, not being intoxicated, and I put up a fight. But had I been seized by my hair and forced down by the French Viscount abroad who slapped me on the cheek and whose lower jaw I shot away for it, I should have felt a rapture and, perhaps, should not have felt anger. So it seemed to me then.</p>
						<p>“I tell all this in order that every one may know that the feeling never absorbed the whole of me absolutely, but there always remained the most perfect consciousness (on that consciousness indeed it was all based). And although it would take hold of me to the pitch of madness, or, so to say, obstinacy, it would never reach the point of making me forget myself. It reached in me the point of a perfect fire, but I could at the same time overcome it completely, even stop it at its climax; only I never wished to stop it. I am convinced that I could live all my life as a monk, in spite of the brutal voluptuousness with which I am gifted and which I always called forth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a> I am always master of myself when I want to be. And so let it be understood that I do not claim irresponsibility for my crimes, either on account of environment or of disease.</p>
						<p>“The thrashing over, I put the penknife in my waistcoat pocket and, without saying a single word, left the house and threw it away in the street, a long distance from the house, so that nobody should ever discover it. Then I waited two days. The little girl, after she had cried, became even more silent; against me, I am convinced, she had no spite. Though she was, certainly, ashamed that she had been punished in that way in my presence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a> But for the shame she, like the child she was, assuredly blamed no one but herself.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a></p>
						<p>“It was precisely during those two days that I once put to myself the question, could I go away and give up the plan I had invented, and I immediately felt that I could, that I could at any moment and at once. About that time I wished to kill myself from the disease of indifference; or rather I don’t know the reason, but during those two or three days (for it was necessary to wait till the little girl forgot it all) I, probably in order to divert myself from the idea which obsessed me, or for fun, committed a theft in the rooms. This was the only theft of my life.</p>
						<p>“There were many people crowded in those rooms. Amongst others there lived there a minor official with his family in two rooms; he was about forty, not altogether a fool, and had a decent appearance, but was poor. I did not make friends with him, and he was afraid of the company that surrounded me there. He had only just received his salary⁠—thirty-five roubles. What chiefly influenced me was that I at that moment needed money (although four days later I received money by post), so that I stole, as though out of want, and not for fun. It was done impudently and obviously: I simply entered his room, when he, his wife, and children were dining in the other little room. There on the chair by the door lay his folded uniform. The idea suddenly occurred to me when I was in the corridor. I put my hand into the pocket and took the purse. But the official heard a movement and looked out of his room. He, it seems, actually saw, at any rate, something, but as he did not see it all, he, of course, did not believe his eyes. I said that, as I was passing down the corridor, I had come in to see the time by his clock. ‘It has stopped,’ he said, and I went out.</p>
						<p>“At that time I drank a great deal, and in my rooms was a whole crowd, Lebiadkin amongst them. I threw away the purse and the small coins, but kept the notes. There were thirty-two roubles, three red notes and two yellow. I immediately changed one red note and sent for champagne; then I sent the second red note, and the third. About four hours later towards evening the official was waiting for me in the corridor.</p>
						<p>“ ‘Nikolai Vsevolodovich, when you came in just now, did you by any chance let my uniform fall off the chair⁠ ⁠… it was by the door?’</p>
						<p>“ ‘No, I don’t remember; was your uniform there?’</p>
						<p>“ ‘Yes, it was.’</p>
						<p>“ ‘On the floor?’</p>
						<p>“ ‘First on the chair, and then on the floor.’</p>
						<p>“ ‘Did you pick it up?’</p>
						<p>“ ‘I did.’</p>
						<p>“ ‘Well, what more do you want?’</p>
						<p>“ ‘In that case, it’s all right.⁠ ⁠…’</p>
						<p>“He dared not finish, nor did he dare tell anybody in the rooms⁠—so timid are those people. In the lodgings every one was extremely afraid of me and respected me. After that I liked to catch his eye a couple of times in the corridor. Soon I got bored with it.</p>
						<p>“After three days<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a> I returned to Gorokhovaya Street. The mother was just going out with a bundle; the man, of course, was not at home; Matryosha and myself were left alone. The windows were open. The house was all inhabited by artisans, and all day long from every floor was heard the knocking of hammers or of singing. About an hour passed. Matryosha sat in her room, on a bench, with her back to me, and occupied with her needle. At last, she suddenly began to sing softly, very softly, as was sometimes her way. I took out my watch and looked at the time; it was two o’clock. My heart began beating.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a> I got up and began approaching her stealthily. On their window-sill stood pots of geranium, and the sun shone very brightly. I quietly sat down near her on the floor. She started, and at first was terribly frightened and jumped up. I took her hand and kissed it quietly, sat her down again on the little bench, and began looking into her eyes. My kissing her hand made her suddenly laugh like a baby, but only for one second, because she impetuously jumped up for the second time and was in such a fright that a spasm passed across her face. She looked at me with eyes motionless with terror, and her lips began to twitch as if she were about to cry, but she did not cry. I kissed her hand again, and took her on my knee.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a> Then she suddenly pulled herself away and smiled as if ashamed, with a wry smile. All her face flushed with shame. I was whispering to her all the time, as though drunk. At last, all of a sudden, such a strange thing happened, which I shall never forget and which bewildered me: the little girl flung her arms round my neck and suddenly began to kiss me passionately. Her face expressed perfect ecstasy. I almost got up to go away⁠—so unpleasant was this to me in the little creature from the sense of pity that I suddenly felt.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a>⁠ ⁠…</p>
						<p>“When all was over, she was confused. I did not try to reassure her and no longer fondled her. She looked at me, smiling timidly. Her face suddenly appeared to me stupid. The confusion rapidly with each minute took an increasing hold over her. At last she covered her face with her hands and stood in the corner with her face to the wall motionless. I was afraid that she might be frightened again, as she had been just before, and silently I left the house.</p>
						<p>“I think that all that happened must have seemed to her, in the end, infinitely horrible, a deadly horror. Notwithstanding the Russian swear words and all sorts of queer conversations that she must have heard from her very cradle, I am completely convinced that she did not yet know anything. For indeed it appeared to her in the end that she had committed an immense crime, and was guilty of a mortal sin. ‘She had killed God.’</p>
						<p>“That night I had the row in the bar which I mentioned in passing. But I woke up in my rooms in the morning; Lebiadkin took me home. My first thought when I awoke was whether she had told or not. It was a minute of real fear, although as yet not very intense. I was very gay that morning and extremely good-natured with every one, and the whole company was very pleased with me. But I left them all and went to Gorokhovaya Street. I met her downstairs in the passage. She was coming in from the grocer’s shop where she had been sent for chicory. On seeing me she dashed off in a terrible fright upstairs. When I entered, her mother had just given her a cuff<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a> for bursting in ‘like a maniac,’ and thus the real reason of her fright was concealed. So far then all was safe. She hid in a corner and did not come out while I was there. I stayed about an hour and then went away.</p>
						<p>“Towards evening I again felt the fear, but incomparably more intense. Of course I could deny all knowledge, but might be given the lie. Penal servitude glimmered for me in the distance. I had never felt fear, and all my life, except in this one case, I never before nor after was afraid of anything⁠—particularly of Siberia, although I might have been deported there more than once. But this time I was frightened and really felt fear, I don’t know why, for the first time in my life⁠—a very tormenting sensation. Besides, that evening in my rooms, I got to hate her to such an extent that I decided to kill her. My chief hatred was at the recollection of her smile. I began to feel contempt and immense loathing for her having, after the whole thing was over, rushed off to the corner and covered her face with her hands; an inexplicable rage seized me, and then cold shivering, and, when towards the morning I began to feel feverish, I was again seized with fear, but such an intense fear that I never knew any torment more violent. Yet I no longer hated the little girl⁠—at any rate it did not reach such a paroxysm as on the previous evening. I realized that intense fear completely drives away hatred and the feeling of revenge.</p>
						<p>“I woke about mid-day, feeling well and surprised even at the force of yesterday’s sensations. Yet I was in a bad humour and was again compelled to go to Gorokhovaya Street, in spite of all my aversion. I remember that I wished intensely at that minute to pick a quarrel on the way with any one, so long as it was a violent quarrel. But when I reached Gorokhovaya Street, I suddenly found Nina Savelevna, the maid, in my room, where she had been waiting for an hour already. I did not like the girl altogether, so that she had come half afraid that I should be angry with her for coming unasked. But I suddenly felt very glad to see her. She was not bad-looking, but unassuming, with those manners of which common people are very fond, so that my landlady had for long sung her praises to me. I found them both drinking coffee together, and the landlady highly pleased with the polite conversation. In the corner of their room I saw Matryosha. She stood looking at her mother and at the visitor without stirring. When I came in she did not hide as before and did not run away. It only appeared to me that she had grown very thin and was in a fever. I was cordial to Nina, and locked my door against the landlady, which I had not done for a long time, so that Nina left perfectly delighted. We left together and for two days I did not return to Gorokhovaya Street. I was already bored with it. I resolved to put an end to it all, to give up my rooms and leave Petersburg.</p>
						<p>“But when I came to give notice to my landlady, I found her much worried and distressed: Matryosha had been ill for three days, had a high temperature, and was delirious every night. Of course I asked what she said in her delirium (we spoke in whispers in my room); she whispered back that she raved of ‘horrors’: ‘ “I killed God,” she says.’ I offered to have a doctor at my own expense, but she did not wish it. ‘By God’s will it will pass without doctors; she is not in bed all the time; during the day she gets up; she has just run round to the grocer’s shop.’ I determined to see Matryosha alone, and, as the landlady let out that she had to go to the Petersburg Road about five o’clock, I decided to come back in the evening.</p>
						<p>“I had a meal in a public-house. Exactly at a quarter past five I returned. I always let myself in with my key. There was no one there but Matryosha. She lay on her mother’s bed behind a screen, and I saw her peep out; but I pretended not to have seen her. All the windows were open. The air outside was warm, and even hot. I walked up and down and then sat down on the sofa. I remember everything up to the last moment. It decidedly gave me pleasure not to speak to Matryosha, but to keep her in suspense; I don’t know why. I waited a whole hour, when suddenly she sprang from her bed behind the screen. I heard both her feet thud upon the floor and then fairly quick steps, and she stood on the threshold of my room. She stood and looked silently. I was so mean that my heart thrilled with joy that I had kept up my character and waited for her to come first. During these days, when I had not once seen her close, she had grown very thin. Her face had shrunk, and her head, I was sure, was hot.</p>
						<p>“Her eyes had grown large and gazed at me without moving, with a dull curiosity, as I thought at first. I sat still and looked and did not move. And then suddenly I felt hatred for her again. But I very soon noticed that she was not in the least afraid of me, but was perhaps rather delirious. But she was not delirious either. She suddenly began shaking her head repeatedly at me, as simple uneducated people without manners do when they find fault with you. And suddenly she raised her tiny fist and began threatening from where she stood. The first moment her gesture seemed to me ridiculous, but then I could stand it no longer.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a> On her face was such despair as was unendurable to see on a child’s face. She shook her tiny fist at me all the while threateningly, and nodded her head reproachfully. I rose and moved towards her in fear, and warily began saying something softly and kindly, but I saw that she would not understand. Then suddenly she covered her face impulsively with both hands, as she had done before, and moved off and stood by the window with her back to me. I returned to my room and sat by the window. I cannot possibly make out why I did not leave then, but remained as though waiting for something. Soon I again heard her quick steps; she came out of the door on to the wooden landing which led to the stairs. I hastily ran to my door, opened it, and had just time to see that Matryosha went into the tiny box-room, which was like a hen-roost and was next door to the water-closet. A very curious idea shot through my mind. To this day I can’t make out why all of a sudden this idea came into my head⁠—everything turned upon it. I half closed the door and sat down again by the window. Of course, it was still impossible to believe in this sudden idea:⁠—‘but after all.⁠ ⁠…’ (I remember everything, and my heart beat violently).</p>
						<p>“After a minute I looked at my watch and noted the time with perfect accuracy. Why I should need to know the time so precisely I don’t know, but I was able to do it, and altogether at that moment I wanted to notice everything. So that I remember now what I noticed and see it as if it were before me. The evening drew on. A fly buzzed about my head and settled continually on my face. I caught it, held it in my fingers, and put it out of the window. Very loudly a van entered the courtyard below. Very loudly (and for some time before) a tailor, sitting at his window in the corner of the courtyard, sang a song. He sat at his work, and I could see him there. It struck me that, as nobody had met me when I passed through the gate and came upstairs, it was also, of course, not necessary that I should be seen now when I should be going downstairs; and I moved my chair from the window purposely so that I could not be seen by the lodgers. I took a book, but threw it away, and began looking at a tiny reddish spider on the leaf of a geranium, and I fell into a trance. I remember everything up to the last moment.</p>
						<p>“Suddenly I took out my watch. Twenty minutes had passed since she went out of the room. The conjecture was assuming the shape of a probability. But I determined to wait precisely fifteen minutes more. It also crossed my mind that perhaps she had come back, and that I perhaps had not heard her. But that was impossible: there was a dead silence, and I could hear the hum of every small fly. Suddenly my heart began bounding again. I looked at my watch: it was three minutes short of the quarter. I sat them out, though my heart beat so as to hurt me. Then I got up, put on my hat, buttoned my overcoat, and looked round the room<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a>⁠—had I left any traces of my visit? I moved the chair closer to the window just as it had been before. At last I gently opened the door, locked it with my key, and went to the little box-room. It was closed, but not locked; I knew that it did not lock, but I did not want to open it, and I stood on tiptoe and began looking through the chink. At that moment, standing on tiptoe, I remembered that, when I sat by the window and looked at the little red spider and fell into a trance, I had been thinking of how I should stand on tiptoe and peer through this very chink. I mention this detail because I wish to prove fully to what an extent I was obviously in possession of my mental faculties and I hold myself responsible for everything. For a long time I peered through the chink, but it was dark there, but not absolutely, so that at last I saw what I wanted.⁠ ⁠…<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a></p>
						<p>“At last I decided to leave.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a> I met no one on the stairs. Three hours later we were all drinking tea in our shirt-sleeves in our rooms and playing with a pack of old cards; Lebiadkin recited poetry. Many stories were told, and, as if on purpose, they were good and amusing, and not as foolish as usual. Kirillov too was there. No one drank, although there was a bottle of rum, but only Lebiadkin took a pull at it now and then.</p>
						<p>“Prokhor Malov once said that ‘when Nikolai Vsevolodovich is pleased to be cheerful and does not sulk, the whole lot of us are happy and talk cleverly.’ I remembered this at that time; consequently I was merry, cheerful, and not sulky. This was how it looked. But I remember being conscious that I was simply a low and despicable coward for my joy at having escaped and that I should never be an honest man.</p>
						<p>“About eleven o’clock the doorkeeper’s little daughter came from the landlady at Gorokhovaya Street, with a message to me that Matryosha had hanged herself. I went with the little girl and saw that the landlady herself did not know why she had sent for me. She wailed aloud and beat her head;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a> there was a crowd and policemen. I stood about for a time<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a> and went away.</p>
						<p>“I was scarcely disturbed all that time, yet I was asked the usual questions. But all I said was that the girl had been ill and delirious, so that I had offered to call a doctor at my own expense. They also questioned me about the penknife, and I said that the landlady had thrashed her, but that there was nothing in that. Nobody knew about my having been there that evening.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a></p>
						<p>“For about a week I did not call there. I went at last<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a> to give notice about the room. The landlady was still crying, although she was already messing about with her rags and sewing as usual. ‘It was for your penknife that I wronged her,’ she said to me, but without much reproach. I settled my account with her, and gave as an excuse for going that I could not remain in a house like that to receive Nina Savelevna. At parting, she again praised Nina Savelevna to me. When I left, I gave her five roubles over and above what was due for the room.</p>
						<p>“In the main I was sick of life, to the verge of madness. The incident in Gorokhovaya Street, after the danger was over, I would have completely forgotten, just as I forgot all the other events of that time, had I not for a certain time remembered with anger what a coward I had been.</p>
						<p>“I vented my anger on any one I could find. About that time, altogether for no definite reason, I took it into my head to cripple my life, but only in as disgusting a way as possible. Already for about a year I had been thinking of shooting myself; but something better presented itself.</p>
						<p>“One day, as I looked at the lame Marya Timofeevna Lebiadkin, the woman who in a sense tidied up the rooms, and at that time was not yet mad, but simply an exalted idiot, in secret madly in love with me (which my friends had discovered), I suddenly determined to marry her. The idea of the marriage of Stavrogin with that lowest of creatures excited my nerves. Anything more monstrous it was impossible to imagine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a> At any rate I married her, not simply because of ‘a bet made after dinner in one’s cups.’ The witnesses were Kirillov and Peter Verkhovensky, who happened to be in Petersburg; and lastly, Lebiadkin himself and Prokhor Malov (who is now dead). No one else ever knew of it, and those who did swore to keep silence. That silence always seemed to me a kind of meanness, but it has not been broken up till now, although I intended to make it public; now I make it public as well as the rest.</p>
						<p>“The wedding over, I went to the country to stay with my mother. I went to distract myself.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a> In our town I had left behind me the idea that I was mad⁠—which idea still persists even now and undoubtedly does me harm, as I shall explain later. After that I went abroad and remained there four years.</p>
						<p>“I was in the East in the monastery on Mount Athos and attended religious services which lasted eight hours; I was in Egypt, lived in Switzerland, travelled even in Iceland; spent a whole year at Göttingen University. During the last year I became very friendly with a distinguished Russian family in Paris, and with two Russian girls in Switzerland. About two years ago, in Frankfort, passing a stationer’s shop, I noticed amongst the photographs for sale a portrait of a little girl, dressed in an elegant childish dress, but very much like Matryosha.</p>
						<p>“I bought the portrait at once, and when I returned to my hotel I put it on the mantelpiece of my room. There it lay for a week untouched, and I did not once look at it; and when I left Frankfort I forgot to take it with me.</p>
						<p>“I mention this fact only to prove to what an extent I could master my memories and had become indifferent to them. I dismissed the whole lot of them at one go <i>en masse</i>, and the whole mass obediently disappeared, each time, directly I wished it to disappear. To recall the past always bored me, and I never could talk about the past, as nearly all people do, the more so that it was, like everything else concerning me, hateful to me. As for Matryosha, I even forgot to take her picture from the mantelpiece. About a year ago, in the spring, travelling through Germany, I forgot absentmindedly to get out at the station where I had to change, and so went on the wrong line. At the next station I had to get out; it was past two o’clock in the afternoon and a fine bright day. It was a tiny German town. I was shown to a hotel. I had to wait, for the next train did not arrive until eleven o’clock at night. I was even pleased with my adventure, as I was in no hurry to get anywhere. The hotel turned out a wretched little place, but it was all wooded and surrounded with flower-beds. I was given a very small room. I made a large meal, and, as I had been travelling all night, I fell sound asleep after lunch at about four o’clock in the afternoon.</p>
						<p>“In my sleep I had a dream which was completely new to me, for I had never had one like it. In the Dresden gallery there is a picture by Claude Lorraine, called in the catalogue, I think, ‘Acis and Galatea,’ but I always called it ‘The Golden Age,’ I don’t know why. I had seen it before, but about three days ago, as I passed through Dresden, I saw it again. I even went on purpose to have a look at it, and possibly for this alone I stopped at Dresden. It was that picture I dreamt of, but not as of a picture, but as of a reality.</p>
						<p>“A corner of the Greek Archipelago; blue caressing waves, islands and rocks; fertile shore, a magic vista on the horizon, the appeal of the setting sun⁠—no words could describe it. Here was the cradle of European man, here were the first scenes of the mythological world, here its green paradise.⁠ ⁠… Here had once lived a beautiful race. They rose and went to sleep happy and innocent; they filled the woods with their joyful songs; the great abundance of their virgin powers went out into love and into simple happiness. The sun bathed these islands and sea in its beams, rejoicing in its beautiful children. Wonderful dream, splendid illusion! A dream the most incredible of all that had ever been dreamt, but upon it the whole of mankind has lavished all its powers throughout history; for this it has made every sacrifice, for this men have died on the cross and their prophets have been killed; without this, nations will not live and are unable even to die. I lived through all these feelings in my dream; I do not know what exactly I dreamt about, but the rocks, the sea, and the slanting rays of the setting sun⁠—all these seemed to be still visible to me, when I woke and opened my eyes and, for the first time in my life, found them full of tears. A feeling of happiness, until then unfamiliar to me, went through my whole heart, even painfully. It was now evening; through the window of my tiny room, through the green leaves of the flowers standing on the sill, poured a shaft of bright slanting rays from the setting sun, and bathed me in their light. I quickly shut my eyes again, as if longing to bring back the vanished dream, but suddenly, in the middle of the bright, bright light, I saw a tiny point. The point began suddenly to take a definite form, and all of a sudden I distinctly pictured to myself a tiny reddish spider. At once I remembered it on the leaf of the geranium, upon which, too, had poured the rays of the setting sun. It was as though something were plunged through me; I raised myself and sat on my bed.</p>
						<p>“(That’s all how it happened then!)</p>
						<p>“I saw before me! (Oh, not in the flesh! Would that the vision had been true!) I saw before me Matryosha, emaciated, with feverish eyes, in every point exactly as she was when she stood on the threshold of my room and, shaking her head at me, threatened me with her tiny fist. Nothing has ever been so agonizing to me! The pitiable despair of a helpless creature<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a> with an unformed mind, threatening me (with what? what could she do to me, O Lord?), but blaming, of course, herself alone! Nothing like that has ever happened to me. I sat, till night came, without moving, having lost count of time. Is this what they call remorse or repentance? I do not know, and even now cannot say.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a> But it was intolerable to me, that image of her standing on the threshold with her raised and threatening little fist, merely that vision of her then, that moment ‘then,’ that shaking of her head. It is precisely that which I cannot endure, because since then it has come to me almost every day. Not that it comes itself, but that I bring it before myself and cannot help bringing it, although I can’t live with it. Oh, if I could ever see her in the flesh, even though it were an hallucination!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a></p>
						<p>“Why, then, do no other of the memories of my life rouse in me anything like this?⁠—and I had indeed many memories, perhaps much worse in the judgment of men. They rouse merely hatred in me, and that only because they are stimulated by my present state; but formerly I forgot them callously and dismissed them from my mind.</p>
						<p>“I wandered after that for nearly the whole of the following year, and tried to find some occupation. I know I can dismiss the thought of Matryosha even now whenever I want to. I am as completely master of my will as ever. But the whole point is that I never wanted to do it; I myself do not want to, and never shall.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a> So it will go on until I go mad.</p>
						<p>“In Switzerland two months later I was seized with a fit of the same passion and one of the same furious impulses which I used to have before.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a> I felt a terrible temptation to commit a new crime, namely, to commit bigamy (for I was already married). But I fled on the advice of another girl to whom I had confided almost everything, even that I had no love for her whom I desired so much, and that I could never love any one. Moreover, the fresh crime would not in any way rid me of Matryosha.</p>
						<p>“Thus I decided to have these little sheets printed and three hundred copies sent to Russia. When the time comes, I shall send some of them to the police and to the local authorities; simultaneously I shall send them to the editors of all newspapers with a request that they shall be published; I shall also send them to a number of people in Petersburg and in Russia who know me. They will also come out in a translation abroad. I know that I shall, perhaps, not be worried by the law, at any rate not to any considerable extent. It is I who am informing against myself and I have no accuser; besides, the evidence is extraordinarily slight or non-existent. Finally, the rooted idea that I am mentally unbalanced and, certainly, the efforts of my family, who will make use of that idea, will quash any legal prosecution that might threaten me. By the way, I make this statement in order to prove that I am now of sound mind and understand my situation. But there will remain those who will know everything and will look at me, and I at them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a> I want every one to look at me. Will it relieve me? I don’t know. I come to this as to my last resource.</p>
						<p>“Once more: if a good search be made by the Petersburg police, perhaps something might be discovered. The landlady and her husband might be living even now in Petersburg. The house, of course, must be remembered. It was painted a bright sky-blue. For myself, I shall not go anywhere, and for a certain length of time (a year or two) I shall always be found at Skvoreshniki, my mother’s estate. If required, I will appear anywhere.</p>
						<p class="c016">“<span class="sc">Nikolai Stavrogin.</span>”</p>
					</section>
				</section>
				<section id="appendix-chapter-1-2" epub:type="chapter">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h4><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a>
					</hgroup>
					<p><span class="sc">The</span> reading lasted for about an hour. Tikhon read slowly, and, possibly, read certain passages twice over. All the time Stavrogin had sat silent and motionless.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a> Tikhon took off his glasses, paused, and, looking up at him, was the first to begin to speak rather guardedly.</p>
					<p>“Can’t certain corrections be made in this document?”</p>
					<p>“Why should there? I wrote sincerely,” Stavrogin replied.</p>
					<p>“Some corrections in the style should.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
					<p>“I forgot to warn you,” he said quickly and peremptorily, pulling himself up, “that all you say will be useless; I shall not postpone my intention; don’t try to dissuade me. I shall publish it.”</p>
					<p>“You did not forget to tell me that, before I began to read.”</p>
					<p>“Never mind,” Stavrogin interrupted peremptorily, “I repeat it again: however great the force of your objections may be, I shall not give up my intention. And observe that, by this clumsy or clever phrase⁠—think of it what you like⁠—I am not trying to get you at once to start arguing and coaxing me.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a></p>
					<p>“I shall not argue with you, still less coax you, to give up your intention, nor could I do it either. Your idea is a great idea, and it would be impossible to express more perfectly a Christian idea. Repentance cannot go further than the wonderful deed which you have conceived, if only.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
					<p>“If only what?”</p>
					<p>“If it were indeed repentance and indeed a Christian idea.”</p>
					<p>“I wrote sincerely.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a></p>
					<p>“You seem deliberately to wish to make yourself out coarser than your heart would desire.⁠ ⁠…” Tikhon gradually became bolder. Evidently “the document” made a strong impression on him.</p>
					<p>“ ‘Make myself out’? I repeat to you, I did not ‘make myself out,’ still less did I ‘pose.’ ”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a></p>
					<p>Tikhon quickly cast his eyes down.</p>
					<p>“This document comes straight from the needs of a heart which is mortally wounded⁠—am I not right in this?” he said emphatically and with extraordinary earnestness. “Yes, it is repentance and natural need of repentance that has overcome you, and you have taken the great way, the rarest way. But you, it seems, already hate and despise beforehand all those who will read what is written here, and you challenge them. You were not ashamed of admitting your crime; why are you ashamed of repentance?”</p>
					<p>“Ashamed?”</p>
					<p>“You are ashamed and afraid!”</p>
					<p>“Afraid?”</p>
					<p>“Mortally. Let them look at me, you say; well, and you, how will you look at them? Certain passages in your statement are emphasized; you seem to be luxuriating in your own psychology and clutch at each detail, in order to surprise the reader by a callousness which is not really in you. What is this but a haughty defiance of the judge by the accused?”</p>
					<p>“Where is the defiance? I kept out all personal discussion.”</p>
					<p>Tikhon was silent. His pale cheeks flushed.</p>
					<p>“Let us leave that,” Stavrogin said peremptorily. “Allow me to put to you a question on my side: we have now been talking for five minutes since you read that” (he nodded at the pages), “and I do not see in you any expression of aversion or shame.⁠ ⁠… You don’t seem to be squeamish.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
					<p>He did not finish.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a></p>
					<p>“I shall not conceal anything from you: I was horrified at the great idle force that had been deliberately wasted in abomination. As for the crime itself, many people sin like that, but they live in peace and quiet with their conscience, even considering it to be the inevitable delinquency of youth. There are old men, too, who sin in the same way⁠—yes, lightly and indulgently. The world is full of these horrors. But you have felt the whole depth to a degree which is extremely rare.”</p>
					<p>“Have you come to respect me after these pages?” Stavrogin said, with a wry smile.</p>
					<p>“I am not going to answer that straight off. But there certainly is not, nor can there be, a greater and more terrible crime than your behaviour towards the girl.”</p>
					<p>“Let us stop this measuring by the yard.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a> Perhaps I do not suffer so much as I have made out, and perhaps I have even told many lies against myself,” he added suddenly.</p>
					<p>Tikhon once more let this pass in silence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a></p>
					<p>“And the young lady,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a> Tikhon began again, “with whom you broke off in Switzerland; where, if I may ask, is she⁠ ⁠… at this moment?”</p>
					<p>“Here.”</p>
					<p>There was silence again.</p>
					<p>“Perhaps I did lie much against myself,” Stavrogin persisted once more. “Well, what does it matter that I challenge them by the coarseness of my confession, if you noticed the challenge? I shall make them hate me still more, that’s all. Surely that will make it easier for me.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a></p>
					<p>“That is, anger in you will rouse responsive anger in them, and, in hating, you will feel easier than if you accepted their pity.”</p>
					<p>“You are right. You understand.” He laughed suddenly. “They may perhaps call me a Jesuit and sanctimonious hypocrite after the document, ha, ha, ha! Yes?”</p>
					<p>“Certainly there is sure to be some such opinion. And do you expect to carry out your intention soon?”</p>
					<p>“To-day, to-morrow, the day after to-morrow, how do I know? But very soon. You are right: I think, indeed, it will in the end happen that I shall publish it unexpectedly, and, indeed, in a revengeful, hateful moment, when I hate them most.”</p>
					<p>“Answer me one question, but sincerely, to me alone, only to me,” Tikhon said in quite a different voice; “if some one forgave you for this” (Tikhon pointed at the pages), “and not one of those whom you respect or fear, but a stranger, a man whom you will never know, if, reading your terrible confession, he forgave you, in the privacy of his heart⁠—would you feel relieved, or would it be just the same to you?”</p>
					<p>“I should feel easier,” Stavrogin said in an undertone. “If you forgave me, I should feel very much relieved,” he added, casting his eyes down.</p>
					<p>“Provided that you forgive me too,” Tikhon murmured in a penetrating voice.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a></p>
					<p>“It is false humility. All these monastic formulas, you know, are not fine in the least. I will tell you the whole truth: I want you to forgive me. And besides you⁠—one or two more, but as for the rest⁠—let the rest rather hate me. But I want this, so that I may bear it with humility.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
					<p>“And universal pity for you⁠—could you not bear it with the same humility?”</p>
					<p>“Perhaps I could not.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a> Why do you.⁠ ⁠…”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a></p>
					<p>“I feel the extent of your sincerity and am, of course, very much to blame, but I am not good at approaching people. I have always felt it a great fault in myself,” Tikhon said sincerely and intimately, looking straight into Stavrogin’s eyes. “I just say this, because I am afraid for you,” he added; “there is an almost impassable abyss before you.”</p>
					<p>“That I shan’t be able to bear it? Not able to endure<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a> their hatred?” Stavrogin gave a start.</p>
					<p>“Not their hatred alone.”</p>
					<p>“What else?”</p>
					<p>“Their laughter.” Tikhon half whispered these words, as if it were more than he had strength for.</p>
					<p>Stavrogin blushed; his face expressed alarm.</p>
					<p>“I foresaw it,” he said; “I must have appeared to you a very comic character after your reading of my ‘document.’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a> Don’t be uncomfortable. Don’t look disconcerted. I expected it.”</p>
					<p>“The horror will be universal and, of course, more false than sincere. People fear only what directly threatens their personal interests. I am not talking of pure souls: they will be horrified in themselves and will blame themselves, but no notice will be taken of them⁠—besides they will keep silent. But the laughter will be universal.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a></p>
					<p>“I am surprised what a low opinion you have of people and how they disgust you.” Stavrogin spoke with some show of anger.</p>
					<p>“Believe me, I judged rather by myself than by other people!” Tikhon exclaimed.</p>
					<p>“Indeed? but is there also something in your soul that makes you amused at my misery?”</p>
					<p>“Who knows, perhaps there is? oh, perhaps there is!”</p>
					<p>“Enough. Tell me, then, where exactly am I ridiculous in my manuscript? I know myself, but I want you to put your finger on it. And tell it as cynically as possible, tell me with all the sincerity of which you are capable. And I repeat to you again that you are a terribly queer fellow.”</p>
					<p>“In the very form of this great penance there is something ridiculous. Oh, don’t let yourself think that you won’t conquer!” he suddenly exclaimed, almost in ecstasy. “Even this form will conquer” (he pointed to the pages), “if only you sincerely accept the blows and the spitting. It always ended in the most ignominious cross becoming a great glory and a great strength, if the humility of the deed was sincere. Perhaps even in your lifetime you will be comforted!⁠ ⁠…”</p>
					<p>“So you find something ridiculous in the form itself?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a> Stavrogin insisted.</p>
					<p>“And in the substance. The ugliness of it will kill it,” Tikhon said in a whisper, looking down.</p>
					<p>“Ugliness! what ugliness?”</p>
					<p>“Of the crime. There are truly ugly crimes. Crimes, whatever they be, the more blood, the more horror in them, the more imposing they are, so to say, more picturesque. But there are crimes shameful, disgraceful, past all horror, they are, so to say, almost too inelegant.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
					<p>Tikhon did not finish.</p>
					<p>“You mean to say,” Stavrogin caught him up in agitation, “you find me a very ridiculous figure when I kissed the hands of the dirty little girl.⁠ ⁠…<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a> I understand you very well, and that is why you despair for me, that it is ugly, revolting⁠—not precisely revolting, but shameful, ridiculous, and you think that that is what I shall least of all be able to bear.”</p>
					<p>Tikhon was silent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a></p>
					<p>“I understand why you asked about the young lady from Switzerland, whether she was here.”</p>
					<p>“You are not prepared, not hardened,” Tikhon said timidly in a whisper, casting his eyes down; “you are uprooted, you do not believe.”</p>
					<p>“Listen, Father Tikhon: I want to forgive myself, and that is my object, my whole object!” Stavrogin suddenly said with gloomy ecstasy in his eyes. “Then only, I know, that vision will disappear. That is why I seek boundless suffering. I seek it myself. Don’t make me afraid, or I shall die in anger.”</p>
					<p>The sincerity was so unexpected that Tikhon got up.</p>
					<p>“If you believe that you can forgive yourself and attain that forgiveness in this world through your suffering; if you set that object before you with faith, then you already believe completely!” Tikhon exclaimed rapturously. “Why did you say, then, that you did not believe in God?”</p>
					<p>Stavrogin made no answer.</p>
					<p>“For your unbelief God will forgive you, for you respect the Holy Spirit without knowing Him.”</p>
					<p>“Christ will forgive too?” asked Stavrogin, with a wry smile and in a quickly changed tone; and in the tone of his question a suspicion of irony could be heard.</p>
					<p>“It says in the Book: ‘And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones,’ you remember. According to the Gospel there is no greater crime.⁠ ⁠…”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a></p>
					<p>“Quite plainly, you don’t want a row, and you are laying a trap for me, venerable Father Tikhon,” Stavrogin muttered scornfully and with annoyance, making as if to get up; “in a word, you want me to settle down, to marry, perhaps, and end my life as a member of the local club, and visit your monastery on holidays. Why, that’s penance! isn’t it so? though as a reader of hearts you, perhaps, foresee that it will certainly be so, and all that is needed now is for me to be nicely wheedled into it for form’s sake, since I am only too eager for that⁠—isn’t it so?”</p>
					<p>He gave a wry smile.</p>
					<p>“No, not that penance, I am preparing another for you!” Tikhon went on earnestly, without taking the least notice of Stavrogin’s smile and remark.</p>
					<p>“I know an old man, a hermit and ascetic, not here, but not far from here, of such great Christian wisdom that he is even beyond your and my understanding. He will listen to my request. I will tell him about you. Go to him, into retreat, as a novice under his guidance, for five years, for seven, for as many as you find necessary. Make a vow to yourself, and by this great sacrifice you will acquire all that you long for and don’t even expect, for you cannot possibly realize now what you will obtain.”</p>
					<p>Stavrogin listened gravely.</p>
					<p>“You suggest that I enter the monastery as a monk.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a></p>
					<p>“You must not be in the monastery, nor take orders as a monk; be only a lay-brother, a secret, not an open one; it may be that, even living altogether in society.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
					<p>“Enough, Father Tikhon.” Stavrogin interrupted him with aversion and rose from his chair. Tikhon also rose.</p>
					<p>“What is the matter with you?” he suddenly exclaimed almost in fear, staring at Tikhon. Tikhon stood before him, with his hands clasped, and a painful convulsion seemed to pass for a moment across his face as if from the greatest fear.</p>
					<p>“What’s the matter with you? What’s the matter?” Stavrogin repeated, rushing to him in order to support him. It seemed to him that Tikhon was going to fall.</p>
					<p>“I see⁠ ⁠… I see, as if it stood before me,” Tikhon exclaimed in a voice which penetrated the soul and with an expression of the most violent grief, “that you, poor, lost youth, have never been so near another and a still greater crime than you are at this moment.”</p>
					<p>“Calm yourself!” pleaded Stavrogin, decidedly alarmed for him. “Perhaps I shall still postpone it.⁠ ⁠… You are right.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
					<p>“No, not after the publication, but before it, a day, an hour, perhaps, before the great step, you will throw yourself on a new crime, as a way out, and you will commit it solely in order to avoid the publication of these pages.”</p>
					<p>Stavrogin shuddered with anger and almost with fear.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-74" id="noteref-74" epub:type="noteref">74</a> “You cursed psychologist!”⁠—he suddenly cut him short in fury and, without looking round, left the cell.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
